[CHIMES]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Hey.
I'm Ashleigh Sergeant.
And welcome to "Everyday
Enlightenment," your go-to show
for tips on how to be more
conscious in the midst
of your busy modern life.
Have you ever really wanted
to change a bad habit
but found yourself back
in the same situation over
and over again or in the
middle of a particular behavior
that you desperately
want to shift
but find yourself
totally unable to stop?
According to the
tradition of yoga,
the very first step to changing
behavior that causes suffering
is actually recognizing
these patterns even
exist in ourselves
and then cultivating
the desire to change them.
Today, I'm here with the
powerful, hilarious, and very
real Gina Caputo.
Gina is a longtime yoga and
meditation practitioner,
a lover of nature,
music, and cooking,
and a self-proclaimed
work in progress.
Gina, thank you so much
for being here today.
>> Well, thank
you for having me.
>> I know that this is a
topic near and dear to both
of our hearts.
>> Yes.
>> And I think one that is
particularly important right
now in our modern age of
things like yoga and meditation
to make you peaceful
and happy and blissful.
It doesn't just happen.
>> Right.
>> You know?
Because you get on your
mat once in a while, or you
sit on your cushion
once in a while.
>> Yeah, once in a while.
And the rest of the time, you're
out there living in the world.
And that's really where the
yoga tradition comes in,
from a really deep level,
to actually give us
tools to transform suffering,
not to just annihilate it.
It doesn't really
work like that.
>> And not to bypass it.
>> Fair.
And not to bypass it.
>> I think as human beings,
it's helpful to recognize that
we're all subject to what
we could call ordinary
consciousness.
And you really nailed it.
Where in previous generations I
don't think that it was really
championed to do this kind
of self-reflective work
and then, you know,
talk about it.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I'm really
grateful that I think that
we're in a time where at least
it's becoming, in some ways,
a little bit more popular
to be doing this work.
But I think a big step that
we need to take in Yoga Land,
if you want to call it
that, or modern yoga,
is to recognize that
we're selling it
in a particular way,
which you described,
where it brings about peace
and tranquility and happiness.
But I'm not sure that we're
being clear about what
that path actually looks like.
Like we said, you don't
just step on your mat
and it magically happens.
That in fact, it's a journey.
And that journey
is one, I believe,
that is really
transcending the patterns
in the ordinary consciousness,
these behavioral grooves
that we get stuck in, kind of
little ruts of behavior, that
often go under the line
of your consciousness,
or your awareness.
And so, yeah, it's fantastic
that we have these tools--
quite ancient tools, in fact--
that are still pertinent
to the challenges
of being a modern day human.
I would love to
see us, as yogis,
take that next step,
though, and really call out
the evaluation and the work
and what that work looks
like on this path of yoga.
>> Yeah.
And I think that point of even
calling them tools, or calling
it work, is what
it is, you know?
And when you think about
tools and, you know,
tools that we use with
our hands and what
it takes to actually
build something and build
a structure.
It takes time and
labor and work.
And that is actually
what it takes
to transform ordinary
consciousness,
the consciousness
that keeps us stuck.
>> Yeah.
I really resonate with
what you were just saying.
It was in some ways like
a devastating game changer
to recognize, as I was learning
yoga in the beginning--
to recognize that I could
no longer say things like,
you make me so mad, or
this really upsets me.
Because that is just a
language practice that
is attributing your
suffering to something
that's external to you.
>> Mm-hmm.
That's huge.
>> Yeah, it was.
And I was upset to read
that maybe I was doing it.
And that it wasn't
all of these things--
traffic or, you know, any
other of these mundane things.
They're not the cause
of your suffering.
And so it was with
great joy that I
saw that the causes
of our suffering
are actually codified,
like laid out.
For someone like me to have
names for each of these root
causes of suffering, then made
me feel like, OK, I can really
sink my teeth into this
part of the practice
now that I can name it.
I see it show up in my life, and
now I can say, ah, that's this,
or that's that.
And then it helps you
take responsibility
for both your
suffering and your joy.
You realize you're the one
really in control of that.
>> Yeah.
So in some of the yoga texts,
particularly Patanjali's "Yoga
Sutras," I find
them so incredible,
because they really outline a
technology that is timeless,
a way that we can actually start
to identify these patterns.
Even in this crazy,
busy modern world,
they totally still apply today--
how to look at ourselves in
a more clear way in order
to transcend and move through
some of these patterns.
>> Yeah.
The word you used,
"clear," it gives us
like a system for looking
at ourselves in maybe
a more honest way.
I love that.
So, yeah.
In Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras,"
there's so much good stuff.
It's like such a
rich text to dig
into as a yoga practitioner.
But I remember vividly
coming to like a screeching
halt when I got to the section
that was about the Kleshas.
So the Kleshas are the
five causes of suffering,
like the root
causes of suffering.
And most of us who participate
in ordinary consciousness
really like to assign
our suffering, the root
cause of our suffering,
to something external.
Well, it's my boss.
Well, it's my mother-in-law.
Well, it's this traffic.
Well, it's the bad weather.
Right?
Those are the causes.
And it removes-- this is
where I think of honesty--
it removes us and
our participation
from the equation.
Where the Kleshas firmly put
that responsibility right back
on your lap, right
into your plate.
So the five Kleshas
are-- the first one
is considered the root Klesha,
or the root cause of suffering,
like the root of all
the other root causes.
The tap root, so to speak.
And it is "avidya,"
or ignorance.
And here, this is
not your IQ or what
you've got on your SATs
or anything like that,
but an ignorance that
is a deeper ignorance
about the nature of things.
So if I were to give an example
of that kind of ignorance,
it might be--
well, consider our
relationship with nature.
So right there might be
an example of avidya.
And ignorance that every time I
use plastics, or my purchasing
patterns and habits,
that these aren't having
an impact on anybody else.
Or we underestimate the
impact that we're having
on each other at all times.
So let's say you're in a
grocery store, you know,
and you're maybe not
having a great day.
We forget that our thoughts,
our words, our actions
are all having an impact
on the people that we
share this Earth with.
>> Yeah.
>> That one comes
up all the time.
>> Absolutely.
And I think one of the most
powerful things that we
can do in any moment
to help to move
through this
pattern of ignorance
is to start to get in the
habit of asking ourselves,
how am I affecting others?
>> Yes.
>> How are my choices
affecting not just me?
>> Right.
All day long.
And let's be completely
honest about it--
that's work.
>> That's work.
And it's a lot easier
to be ignorant.
And that is why this
is one of those--
>> And more painful.
>> Well, indeed.
>> At the end of the day.
It might be hard to
look at these things.
But the end of the day,
it's more difficult.
>> It's harder not too.
>> It's harder not to.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
The second one is
also very interesting
and tends to go under
the radar for most
of us, the consciousness radar.
And it's "asmita."
And it's this
misidentification of who
I am with the
identity construct,
or my personality construct.
So for me, you know,
I am Gina Caputo.
I am the director of the
Colorado School of Yoga.
I'm a wife.
I'm a sister.
I'm a daughter.
I like hiking, and
blah blah, blah.
I'm a hiker.
You know, I give
all these labels,
and I identify with those
labels rather than who I really
am, which is bigger than
that, broader than that,
deeper than that.
And this is a big
part of the work.
The reason it
causes suffering is
because we get attached
to being these things.
And I've seen it
in yoga, and I'm
sure you have to,
when a person who
is quite adept at the
physical practice,
let's just say posture
practice, gets injured.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, who are you?
You were known--
for example, you
were known as this
person that could
do these marvelous things.
And all of a sudden that's gone.
Now who are you?
And you suffer.
>> And this goes for physical
appearance in general.
>> Oh, yes.
>> And it's so big right
now in our society as well,
which is who are we once this
physical body starts to break
down, which it will?
You know, that all of these
things are impermanent--
who am I, really?
Well, I really strongly identify
with my curly brown hair,
you know.
>> Or your job.
That's a great one.
>> I think that's a
really common one.
When people retire,
then they have
a bit of a identity crisis.
Who am I now that I
don't have this job?
I'll tell you one way--
this might seem silly,
but I think it can
be very helpful--
is to look at two things.
One is, what questions do you
ask when you meet someone?
Because a very common
one is, what do you do?
>> Yeah.
>> As if that was you.
The other would be very similar.
It would be how do you
respond to those questions?
How do you introduce yourself?
>> Yeah.
What's your own story and
narrative around who you are?
>> Exactly.
>> I'm from here.
I have this many kids.
>> Right.
So something that
I've been playing
with over the years is instead
of doing that question--
that ubiquitous question
that everyone is expecting,
like, oh, what do you do--
is I'll say something like,
what fires you up?
And it's kind of cool, because
there's this moment of like--
[STAMMERING] like
I'm ready to say
that I am a CEO of blah,
blah, blah, or whatever.
And then they have to like--
and I'll say, no, no,
like, you know, what do you
feel passionate about?
What excites you?
And that's a small practice
of rewiring or rewriting
this unconscious
behavior of identifying
with these particular
things instead of speaking
to the broader,
deeper who are you?
>> Yeah.
That's so good.
>> Thanks.
>> I love it.
>> So the third and fourth one
are like two sides of the same
coin.
And I mean, these two--
all the Kleshas, I
believe, are game-changers.
But these two, we're going
through them all day.
It's like we're flipping
this coin all day long.
And to a point you've
just made, this
means that we can be in
practice all day long.
>> All the time.
>> Not just when you're in
your approved stretchy pants
or on your mat,
but all day long.
>> We'll talk about
conscious living.
It's being conscious,
aware, having
intentionality around
everything that we're doing.
>> Not just in those minutes
that you're in a formal yoga
practice.
So these next two are
"raga" and "dvesha,"
or attachment and aversion.
And man, they show
up all the time.
How about this-- we wake up.
We look outside.
It's a beautiful day.
Ah, beautiful day equals
good, equals me happy.
You wake up.
It's a gray, stormy day.
Gray, stormy day equals
bad, equals me unhappy.
Those right there are examples
of attachment and aversion.
That if it isn't the one I
want, the one that I'm either
attached to, and it's the
one I'm averse to, I suffer.
But consider, is it the day
that's causing the suffering?
Because I dare say,
there must be someone out
there that sees a sunny
day and goes, oh no.
I have a friend, actually,
that means skin cancer to her.
So that's actually a bummer.
So could it possibly be the day?
Or another way this
comes up constantly
in yoga classes, like these
posture practice classes,
is let's say maybe the
teacher asks you to do
a posture that you dislike.
I remember, you know, every
time the teacher would say,
put your hands alongside your
ears for Wheel, I'd go, ugh.
Now, is it Wheel?
Because the woman next to me
is like, oh yes, my favorite.
>> Well, maybe it's the teacher,
because that's the next one we
go to.
Oh, I can't stand this teacher.
>> This terrible teacher
that doesn't understand me.
>> Oh, she's the worst.
>> Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
So consider that all day long.
Go to a restaurant, you have
this thing that you want.
It's your favorite dish.
You go there every
Thursday, and you get it.
Well, you got there on that
Thursday and, I don't know,
they're closed.
Or you get there,
and they say, oh,
we're out of the caprese
sandwich or whatever it is.
And we suffer.
We love to assign that suffering
to something else that's
not us.
>> External for us.
>> Raga and dvesha give
us the opportunity to see
you're choosing that.
You're choosing that.
You're choosing that attachment.
You're choosing that aversion.
So for this one, the way that I
try to work with this is really
that I'm constantly aware
of those moments I feel both
extremely jubilant and happy
that something went my way
and the opposite of that-- those
times when I'm deeply angry
or upset about something
that isn't going my way--
and I say, ah,
attachment, ah, aversion.
Label it.
For me what it feels like is
I try to zoom out a little.
You know, it's like you take
the camera-- you're in tight
on this thing that you're
attached or averse to,
and you kind of back it out.
>> Slowly loosen the grip, lady.
>> That's right.
Like, I think I'm going to be
OK if I eat this other thing
or if the day is not as
sunny as I would like.
So it takes a lot of discipline.
>> Yeah.
And to say, it's not that you
can't want something or desire
something.
>> Right.
>> Right?
And it's not to say
that we are never
going to prefer certain
things and not other things.
That's fine.
And that's the reality of
being in this human body.
But does it govern our state
of suffering or happiness?
>> Bingo.
Bingo.
It would be silly--
I would never say,
it's all good.
I actually don't
care for that phrase.
>> Yeah.
>> Like, I get it.
But I also don't care
for it, because it almost
acts like I should
just accept everything.
Well, in essence, yeah,
that would be nice.
But it removes
what you just said.
It's like, we are going
to have preferences.
The trick is, can
you have a preference
and not be attached
to the outcome?
Can you have a preference
and not be averse
if it doesn't go your way?
And it's this fine line.
So it goes back to
this discipline,
where you have your preference.
You kind of soften
around the preference.
And so that when, if it doesn't
go the way that you prefer,
you're OK.
You're OK.
>> Yeah, really powerful.
>> Which is not moving that
you have the preference.
Just that you're OK if
it doesn't go that way.
>> I love that that vision
of just a little bit of space
around it, a little
bit of space.
>> Zoom out, yeah.
That's a good one.
So the last one,
the last Klesha,
or root cause of suffering,
is called "abhinivesha."
And it's either
like a fear of death
or simply not acknowledging
that all humans are
subject to this cycle of
beginning, middle, end.
We all are subject to dying.
>> This one is very touchy
for the Western world.
We don't like to
talk about this.
>> No, we certainly don't.
And I think what makes me
sad about not acknowledging
death in a healthy way is that
we live as if we won't die.
>> Yeah.
And it's the one sure thing.
>> It is.
Indeed.
It is the one sure thing.
And yet, we may
live in a way that
squanders life, that
squanders opportunities,
because we're not
acknowledging it.
Now obviously, you could
get obsessed with it.
And that might get a
little morose and morbid.
But that's why I say a healthy
relationship with it is really
just acknowledging
it's inevitable.
So you know, a certain
amount of carpe diem--
like us saying, I'm
going to do this.
I'm going to try this.
Or I'm not going to let
this thing dominate me,
that I'm going to
find this workable.
Because I will die,
and life is short.
>> Yeah.
And this is where the sometimes
kind of sounds like, you know,
foofy practices that
we hear sometimes
in the modern world now, but
the practice of gratitude.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, that will drop
you in so quickly to be able
to really connect with
the gratitude of, wow,
look at these amazing people
around me that I get to speak
to today.
And the barrage of information
that we have all the time--
oh, I can't get this?
Well now, I'm going
to move on to this.
And one of my
teachers always says
we've lost the
power of daydreaming
in our modern world, because we
never actually are just sitting
anymore and kind of thinking.
We're on our phone
and then on this thing
and, you know, always
doing something.
And I find that that is the
space where this abhinivesha
gets really unpacked, because we
have this free time to actually
be able to reflect on life.
>> And you make me think of a
practice that I try to be very
diligent about doing with
regards to abhinivesha that I
think is quite simple.
It requires that you take
a moment of time and space.
As you just said, the
busier our lives get,
the less we make time, or
prioritize time, to do this.
But one thing I try to do each
and every day and as soon as I
can upon waking-- so you know,
coming from the sleep state
to the conscious awake state--
is I try to have gratitude.
I say this internally.
It may or may not
work for everybody.
But I have gratitude.
I say, just this--
just this.
And what I mean by that
is, I woke up again.
Like, I feel the current
of life in me again today.
And I try to have a
root gratitude for that.
Let me just be clear.
I'm not grateful that everything
in my life is perfect today.
Because not a single day has
that actually felt the case.
It may be that my
health is a little off.
It may be that work is
a challenge right now.
It may be that I'm having some
challenges in relationships.
It may be that it's
not a nice day outside,
or whatever the cause.
I try to just say I'm
alive again today.
And that is like
this root gratitude
that I think it's very
helpful to stay connected to.
It's simply that you're alive.
Not that your life has gone
perfectly, not that you're
experiencing joy every moment--
just that the life force
runs through you again today.
It's not easy.
>> Amen to that.
>> And it's work, right?
>> Yeah.
>> But it may be the most
important work you do.
We're always teaching
other people by example.
We're always leading by example.
No matter how
unimportant you might
think you are in the
grand scheme of things,
or the hierarchy, we are
all influencing each other
all the time.
So I would love to say
this work isn't easy.
But it may actually be the most
important work that you do.
>> And I've found that if you
can cultivate a curiosity about
it--
>> Yes.
It's like a curiosity
about surfing the waves.
>> It is.
>> You know, it's not a
curiosity about how happy can I
be, per se?
But can you be curious
about surfing those waves,
climbing the mountains,
going down into the valleys--
all of it?
>> Hmm, this is interesting.
What's behind this?
>> Yes.
Yes.
>> So Gina, are you ready to
give us your top tips on how
to work with these Kleshas and
these root causes of suffering
in the midst of our
really busy lives?
>> I'd love to.
So I always like to keep
things as simple as possible.
So I've come up with
three tips that I
think are really
workable if you want
to jump onto the path of
working with the Kleshas
and these unconscious
behaviors that may be the root
causes of your suffering.
So my first suggestion is
really my top suggestion,
in terms of the most
powerful tip I can offer you,
which is to embrace a
meditation practice.
Now, I feel like we set
ourselves up for disappointment
when we think of meditation
as being a state where
your mind is completely empty.
It's just a mental void.
And you just feel
blissful and happy.
We set ourselves
up for frustration,
because that's rarely what
meditation feels like.
Most of the time, it's
something like you sit.
You focus on your breath.
Your mind wanders.
You come back.
Over and over again,
though, we tend
to get a little
frustrated with that.
What if we looked at meditation,
not as an opportunity
to simply empty your
mind, but become
more aware of your mind and
the patterns of your mind?
I like to think of meditation
as a chance for you
to cultivate the inner witness.
In other words, I am able to
track the activity of my mind.
In psychology, they call
this the onboard observer.
So then meditation
might look like--
I sit.
I focus on my breath.
My mind wanders.
Ah, I become aware that my mind
is no longer in the present.
My mind is no
longer on my breath.
This little practice
that seems like it's not
that big of a deal
and what impact
does that have on my life?
I'll tell you-- it
trains up your awareness.
So when you're caught in
the throes of attachment
and aversion, for example,
you might be able to say,
ah, I'm attached to this.
I'm causing my own suffering.
My second tip is related
to your whole being.
So where meditation may be
largely mentally focused work.
I'd recommend that
you look for ways
to use your body in
this practice as well.
Now maybe obviously,
yoga posture practice
is a great opportunity
for building the stamina
to persevere and stay with this
challenging, long-term work.
But it's not the
only way to do it.
I know many people that use
cycling, running, hiking,
really any activity
that brings you
either to the edge
of your comfort zone
or starts to expand your
comfort zone by challenging
your comfort zone.
So you have these
opportunities to witness things
like attachment
and aversion arise
in the midst of something you're
doing with your entire body.
And my last tip is
going to really work
for some of us, which
is to log your journey.
And as part of that, to also
relax around your process.
And maybe logging it will really
support you in doing that.
What I mean by logging
here is journal.
Any time of day-- this
needn't be a long entry--
but any time of
day, you could be
making little notes
of observations that
have percolated up within you.
And I like that
this also gives you
a written history of yourself.
In some ways, you're writing
a guidebook for yourself.
You are acting as your own guru.
So if your goal is
to start to rewrite
these unconscious behaviors,
what if you literally
wrote down the unconscious
behaviors that you observed?
I feel like it would give
you a real clear map on how
to change these behaviors.
So as I said before,
let's make no mistake
in thinking that
this work is quick--
that it's easy.
In fact, it's very
challenging work.
But at the same time, it's
helpful to acknowledge
because we're always teaching
and leading others by example,
because we're embracing
the responsibility
for our own happiness,
it may actually
be the most important
work you ever do.
>> Well, thanks so much, Gina.
That was really
wonderful information.
It's been great having you here.
>> Thank you.
>> And thank you so much
for joining us for "Everyday
Enlightenment."
Until next time.
[THEME MUSIC]